# SBGP-0018: Optimize Delegation and APY
SolBlaze would like to propose an optimization to the Verified Validators Program to ensure consistency for validators, improve the APY of the pool, reduce operational overhead, and provide exclusive incentivized opportunities for participants in the Verified Validators Program.

## Proposed Change
The current delegation strategy (as modified in SBGP-0017) involves a rotation-based model where validators rotate between Candidate (baseline stake) and Staked (full approval stake) to ensure fairness and reduce wait times. Although this model has allowed for stake to be distributed more fairly among validators, the rotation model tends to cause more negative sentiment from losing the full approval stake after being in the active rotation compared to positive sentiment from gaining it at the start of the active rotation (likely due to the endowment effect / loss aversion). Additionally, the constant rebalancing causes a 2% drag on the pool APY, decreasing it by approximately 11 basis points (an effect that is amplified for users who utilize looping strategies). Furthermore, the batches model of the program requires additional operational overhead to curate batches based on the unique contributions of various validators, which causes additional negative sentiment for validators who have not yet been chosen and also does not carry the same importance now that all validators with the same commission levels will have an equal amount of stake on average throughout the year through the rotation model.

Given the downsides to the rotation model, we propose simplifying the Verified Validators Program into a delegation strategy that equally spreads stake across all participating validators (with 0% commission validators receiving 2x stake compared to validators with commission). As part of this change, we will remove the concepts of batches, queue priority, and Candidate status, since all validators will receive the same stake when accepted and will not be waiting in a queue. With the current amount of pool stake available for the Verified Validators Program, we estimate that 0% commission validators will receive approximately 3600 SOL in stake and validators with commission will receive approximately 1800 SOL in stake (these numbers will fluctuate as TVL and the size of the validator set changes over time). Since these numbers approximately match the average amount of stake that validators are allocated through the rotation model (but at a consistent level instead of jumping between a high and low stake amount), the yearly revenue for validators from the Verified Validators Program should not meaningfully change. Since this equal distribution model requires minimal rebalancing after target stakes have been allocated to all validators, it will not create much drag on the overall pool APY.

Additionally, as part of the original vision of the Verified Validators Program, we are actively collaborating with our partners to offer participants in the program the ability to access additional stake outside of our main delegation. We are also proposing to expand the scope of the DeFi emissions incentive budget (up to 400m BLZE + 100 bSOL per quarter) as established in SBGP-0014 to allow for more general usage to incentivize actions that directly and measurably increase the TVL of the pool, with some of those incentives allocated exclusively to participants in the Verified Validators Program. As TVL grows and the revenue to the DAO increases as a result, we can use our discretionary authority as outlined in SBGP-0011 to dynamically increase the amount of incentives allocated to these actions in order to create a flywheel effect, where more TVL leads to a larger amount of incentives which in turn grows the TVL further. We will share more details about these partner stake and DAO-funded incentive opportunities to participants in the Verified Validators Program after the passage of this proposal.

## Implementation Details

The optimized delegation strategy will be added to the rebalancer bot after the passing of this proposal, and the concepts of batches, queue priority, and Candidate status will be removed from the program. We will incrementally shift stake in the pool to be spread across all validators in the program in accordance with pool rebalancing parameters. We have already coordinated with our partners to provide the APIs for validator stake bonuses, but we will implement the systems required for additional validator incentives in accordance with this proposal.

## Voting

Yes - the delegation strategy will be optimized in accordance with this proposal and additional incentives will be funded

No - the delegation strategy will remain the same and additional incentives will not be funded

## Next Steps
If the proposal passes, the delegation strategy will be updated in accordance with this proposal, and additional incentives will be rolled out to participants in the Verified Validators Program.

If the proposal fails, SolBlaze will discuss any shortcomings or concerns that caused this proposal to fail, make any necessary revisions, and submit a new proposal to the SolBlaze DAO.
